+++
title = "Benji York is doing good work"
date = 2005-10-04
slug = "benji-york-is-doing-good-work"

[taxonomies]
tags = ["zope"]
+++

[Benji York](http://www.benjiyork.com/), a relatively recent Zope
Corporation employee, first appeared on my "does interesting stuff"
radar due to his work with Zope 3 testing: zope.testbrowser, which
promises to bring to Zope 3 testing something I played with before in
the context of Silva but never really made very usable: functional
testing of the web frontend of code on the server side (utilizing
[mechanize](http://wwwsearch.sourceforge.net/mechanize/)). Benji's
innovation to make this really easy is by integrating it with doctests.

Zope 3 is an extremely well tested framework already and through the
efforts of Jim Fulton, Tim "doctest" Peters, Benji York and others is
continuing to push the boundaries in this area. At the same time, by
using doctest in ever expanding ways, they also pushing forward software
documentation at the same time. I haven't seen any other Python project
with a stronger emphasis on testing, except possibly
[PyPy](http://codespeak.net/pypy). Zope 3's rock solid, and we know it,
as we keep banging on it with more tests.

This is not the only thing Benji has been up to though; today I
discovered [his new weblog](http://www.benjiyork.com/blog/), where he
says good stuff on a topic close to my heart: Zope 3 marketing.

Moreover he is actually _doing_ something about it. He's written the
beginnings of a [Zope 3 quickstart
guide](http://www.benjiyork.com/quick_start.txt) that should help people
on their way when learning Zope 3. Perhaps it can eventually lead to a
"20 minute screencast" on Zope 3. Such screencasts seem to be an
essential framework marketing tool in this day and age...
