+++
title = "Introducing Bob Strongpinion"
date = 2016-09-07
slug = "bob-strongpinion"

[taxonomies]
tags = ["software development", "python", "planetpython", "reg", "morepath"]
+++

I posted an article about programming yesterday. ([punctuated
equilibrium in software
development](@/posts/punctuated-equilibrium-in-software.md))
In it I try to share some insights I've had about software development,
and illustrate it with a library I work on that I think is interesting.
I posted it to reddit `/r/programming`, obviously hoping to get a bit of
attention with it. I think the topic is interesting to other developers,
and writing it took a bit of time. Besides, I'm human enough to want
positive attention.

My reddit post quickly sank from sight with nary an upvote. That got me
thinking about what kind of posts I could make that would draw more
attention. I joked a bit that having strong opinions boldly spoken gets
more attention -- but I should blame the topic and my writing more than
anything else. To blame the outside world makes you stop learning from
it, and I want to learn.

In engineering there are always trade offs, and it's important to be
aware of them. It is also nicer to be respectful of works that people
have put a lot of time and effort in. And if you disregard them you are
also less likely to learn and grow. So I won't go out there and say
[Morepath](http://morepath.readthedocs.io/), the Python web framework I
work on, is better than, say, Flask or Django or Pyramid. It depends on
what you're doing. When I [compare Morepath to other web
frameworks](http://morepath.readthedocs.io/en/latest/compared.html), I
probably don't excite you; it may in fact be sleep inducing.

**I think Morepath is great. I think it solves problems that many Flask
and Django developers don't even fully realize they actually have.
That's in fact part of the problem I have in explaining it**. But I also
recognize that in many circumstances other frameworks are the better
choice, for a variety of reasons.

But sometimes I wish I was more bold in expressing my opinions than I
usually am. Sometimes I wish I was more like Bob Strongpinion.

# Who is Bob Strongpinion?

Bob Strongpinion has strong opinions and conviction. He _would_ blog
saying all other web frameworks suck compared to Morepath. He'd have a
lot blog posts with eye-catching titles:

**Django was yesterday. The future belongs to Morepath.**

**10 Reasons Morepath is just plain better.**

**You're doing configuration wrong. This library gets it right.**
([Dectate](http://dectate.readthedocs.org))

**Single dispatch is over. Get ready for predicate dispatch.**
([Reg](http://reg.readthedocs.org))

**Why routing to the model instead of the view is winning.**

Bob Strongpinion posts a _lot_ of articles with lists, and they're all
10 items explaining that what he likes is plain better. Bob Strongpinion
doesn't believe in trade offs in engineering. There's better, and
there's worse, and what he likes is just plain _better_. Bob
Strongpinion knows there's ONE tool that's right for EVERY job.

If someone doesn't agree with Bob Strongpinion's choice of tools,
they're either stupid, or more likely,
[evil](@/posts/they-say-something-i-dont-like-so-they-must-be-lying.md).
Bob Strongpinion may not have more experience in a problem domain than
you do, but it's the RIGHT experience so he's still right.

When Bob Strongpinion makes a pronouncement in a comment thread, the
case is closed. Disagree with him and incur his righteous wrath.

Engineering projects with Bob Strongpinion on it always succeed as he
picks the right tools. And when they don't, it's someone else's fault.
When Bob Strongpinion doesn't get to use his favorite tools it's no
wonder the project failed.

When Bob Strongpinion uses an operating system, it's because it's the
best one for everyone, unless they're too wimpy, so he's still elite.
Bob Strongpinion definitely believes systemd is a great conspiracy to
destroy Linux.

# Conclusion

I think Bob Strongpinion would get a lot more upvotes on reddit. He'd
get attention; some of it negative, but a lot of it would be positive.

_"Yeah, Strongpinion! You tell the truth about software development!"_

And he's always right. Obvious comparisons to certain public figures
come to mind. You can see why his mindset would be comfortable, so it's
understandable why Bob Strongpinion lives among us.

I sometimes wish I could be more like Bob Strongpinion when I promote my
own work. As you can see from the above, I can channel him pretty well.
I snuck him in while rejecting him, how sneaky! The Strongpinion must be
strong in me. I've even done a [list of 10 bullet
points](@/posts/10-reasons-to-check-out-the-morepath-web-framework-in-2015.md)
before. It got some upvotes.

But in the end I keep choosing not to be him.
