+++
title = "Communicating with core developers on the Python 3 transition"
date = 2007-07-16
slug = "communicating-with-core-developers-on-the-python-3-transition"

[taxonomies]
tags = ["python", "python3"]
+++

It has been made abundantly clear to me that some core developers did
not appreciate
[my](@/posts/brief-python-3000-thoughts.md)
[previous](@/posts/python-3-worries-feedback.md)
[communications](@/posts/the-purpose-to-my-whinging-about-the-transition-to-python-3.md)
concerning my worries surrounding transition to Python 3.

I thought matters were resolved and wanted to let the issue rest for a
while, but today I became aware that they are not. Therefore this
attempt to address this as part of the public record.

Some basics concerning my intended message: doom is not at hand. The sky
is not falling. Do not be alarmed. Instead, be prepared. Transitioning
your code to Python 3 (through Python 2.6) will in many cases,
especially for the larger, more widely used, or less well-tested
codebases, not be a cakewalk. The community will be in transition for a
period of years and we need to prepare ourselves so we can best deal
with this. During this transition, there will be more difficulties in
code reuse between projects on different sides of the 2 to 3 transition.

Some apologies are in order. I apologize if I implied that the core
developers had not thought their transition plans through. I hope the
core developers will believe (by careful reading of my previous
communications in my own blog and others) that this was not my intent.
My intent was:

- express my own worries concerning the impact on the community.
- trying to help prepare the community for the upcoming transition
  phase: it's not going to be a cakewalk.
- express how I would like core developers to _communicate_ the
  transition. Core developers will naturally want to attract developers
  to the Python 3 platform. My fear is that the core developers, by
  communicating their enthusiasm, will sometimes inadvertently cause
  Python users to underestimate the costs and length of time of the
  transition. This might lead to an insufficiently prepared community.
  (in my own experience with transitions one needs to be almost
  overabundantly clear on transition issues, or people may
  misunderstand - I understand this is not everybody's experience)

My last point was unfortunately easily misunderstood and in the heat of
the discussion I used words that were clearly too strong. For instance,
I should not have used the word "fork" when describing my worries - this
is clearly a loaded word. I apologize for my use of this word.

I should also have made it far more clear that I was responding to core
developers who addressed me, and not have overgeneralized to other core
developers who did not participate in this conversation.

Let this be clear: I do believe that the core developers have thought
through the transition plans and the implications thereof. I believe
that the transition weighs heavily on their hearts. Too much I thought
that it was a given in this debate that the core developers are not
careless or stupid about the transition. I should have made it more
explicit, as several people understood me to make this implication. I
apologize for this inadvertent implication.

(Note that this doesn't mean I'm not worried anymore, or that I can't
disagree with any core developer on this. It's just that I trust they're
smart, experienced and responsible people. I also hope that this trust
is reciprocal)

I now also see how discussing communication strategies with core
developers can in itself be interpreted as being insulting to their
communication skills. My apologies for this as well. I did not wish to
make that implication. It was a combination of the heat of the debate,
and my inexpertly trying to help with this, given some of my experiences
and thoughts in this matter with Zope 2 to Zope 3 transition (which is
different from the Python one in many, many ways). In the future I will
try to avoid this problem by instead do my own communication surrounding
this topic, and not address the core developers about their
communication.

I should be wiser, but as someone stung heavily on his foray in Python 3
politics I cannot resist a sting in the tail. A note of warning to those
who might wish to follow me in discussing in public their worries
surrounding possible negative aspects concerning the Python 3
transition. Be very clear in your communication. If you are not clear
enough, prepare to be flamed and perhaps even distrusted. It's not a
comfortable position to be in.
