+++
title = "Local European PyCons and EuroPython"
date = 2008-04-12
slug = "local-european-pycons-and-europython"

[taxonomies]
tags = ["conference"]
+++

There is a PyCon UK. There is a PyCon Italy. Just now I saw the
announcement of a PyCon France. I understand why these conferences
happen - local user communities will want to see conferences where most
talks are in their own language and have a bigger selection of talks
relevant to the local community.

But, being Dutch, these country-specific conferences are typically not
things I'd go to, as I'm not based in these countries. I don't speak
French or Italian. The Netherlands being a smaller European country,
with a proportionally smaller group of Python users, I don't think I'll
see a "PyCon the Netherlands" anytime soon either. The same likely holds
true for many of the smaller European countries.

While I'm happy to see so much activity in the European Python
community, it does worry me a little too - because it's not exactly the
_European_ Python community. There is already a conference for that
community: EuroPython. EuroPython is more than for just the European
Python community, in fact - it has traditionally been the most
international Python conference there is. I enjoy meeting people from
the larger international community. Open source is international.

The appearance of country-specific conferences is in itself a good sign:
the Python community in Europe, and these countries in particular, has
grown large enough to support them. It can be argued that these attract
different attendees than EuroPython, people who would not have visited
EuroPython anyway. These conferences, in itself, are of course a good
thing. One can even argue that perhaps they will energize their local
communities so much that _more_ people will end up going to EuroPython.

But there is bound to be some overlap between the potential attendees of
a country-specific conference and the potential attendees of EuroPython.
Moreover, there will be an increased competition to attract
international speakers for these local conferences as well, as it's
unlikely these will want to go speak at _four_ European Python-related
conferences a year. So, local conferences in the UK, Italy and France
may draw away visitors and good speakers from EuroPython. That would be
a shame.

Analyzing the
[statistics](http://europython.pyconuk.org/community/Planning/Projections)
of where EuroPython visitors come from doesn't tell us very much. While
attendance from the Italy and UK, which had PyCons last year, was indeed
down, attendance from many other European conferences was down as well,
including France, where they didn't have a PyCon yet last year (though
certainly they had user group meetings). The statistics don't support
the increased attendance theory either, though: EuroPython last year
wasn't one of the largest ones I've seen in terms of participants -
against the trend of growing usage of Python overall.

One can attribute EuroPython's relatively small size to other causes.
Perhaps the lower attendance is due to the somewhat haphazard
organization in the run-up to the conference last year (it's not a
complaint as I didn't help, and this year already looks to be better).
Perhaps it was due to the location in Lithuania, which may appear to be
out of the way to some people. I think if the location is the cause,
people have entirely the wrong impression. I don't think Vilnius,
Lithuania is harder to reach than, say, Gothenburg Sweden, where we've
had the conference before. Vilnius is certainly not expensive compared
to some of the previous locations EuroPython has been in.

I certainly don't want to begrudge anyone a conference in Python with
their own community and own language. It would be a shame however to see
EuroPython shrink further in the face of local conferences. An
international conference can attract a really interesting set of
attendees and speakers. We should also celebrate the international
nature of our open-source community.

So, I hope my worries are unjustified and more people will visit
EuroPython 2008 in bigger numbers. Speakers: prove my worries wrong and
submit a talk: the call for participation is
[open](http://europython.org/community/Talk_Submissions)! Local
conference organizers: prove my worries wrong and visit EuroPython 2008
with a delegation. Promote EuroPython at your local conferences!
Incentive: you might see speakers you will want to invite for your own
local PyCon there. :)
