+++
title = "Looking for new challenges"
date = 2020-02-05
slug = "looking-again"

[taxonomies]
tags = ["python", "planetpython", "javascript", "typescript", "react", "framework"]
+++

![Passion flower on my balcony](/img/passion_flower.jpg)

I'm looking for new freelance challenges again! I've had an awesome
couple of years working for a client that still keeps me very busy, but
it's time to start thinking about moving on to something new.

What can I do?

- Build (web) applications.
- Build software frameworks.
- Mentor and guide teams when they build web applications.

Who am I in a nutshell? I'm a web developer with more than 20 years of
experience. I am analytical. I ask questions. I am outspoken and honest.
I am creative. I like to learn. I can build, mentor, teach, and help
accelerate a team working on complex software. I care a lot about what
I'm doing and want to be good to the people around me. And I grow
flowers, fruit and vegetables for fun in my garden to relax.

I think I can afford to be rather picky in my search for clients, as I
believe I have a lot to offer. So I'm going to describe what I enjoy
doing next. You can decide whether I might be an interesting fit for
you.

# Technical Interests

I like learning and inventing. I have been developing software
professionally for a long time, and I still love to build new
applications and frameworks, and helping teams to do so.

Over the years I've worked on a range of applications: business
applications, enterprise software, CMSes, and lots more. I understand
that not all applications are the same. An enterprise with a lot of
customers that need customized experiences requires different technical
approaches than an application that has a single deployment. If you have
something new to build, I know how to get it started and how to keep it
under control. I like building applications!

![Tomatoes and blackberries from my garden](/img/tomatoes_blackberries.jpg)

I also enjoy creating software that helps developers build applications
more effectively. This, to me, is an important part of application
development: as developers we need to look for opportunities to extract
components and frameworks from large applications. This helps to
separate concerns and forces a loose coupling between them. This way we
can stay in the red queen's race that is application development and
maintenance.

So as a side effect of building applications, and because it's fun, I
have worked on a lot of projects: several backend web frameworks
(latest: [Morepath](https://morepath.readthedocs.org)), several workflow
engines, [lxml](https://lxml.de) (the most powerful XML Python library),
[Obviel](http://obviel.org) (an obscure frontend web framework I created
before it was cool).

Web forms are a big topic that has been with me for my entire career as
a web developer. Web forms are interesting as there are a lot of
challenges to building a complex form in typical business applications.
A lot comes together in web forms: UI, validation for the purposes of UI
as well as data integrity, various modes of interaction, customization,
backend interaction and security, API design and developer experience. I
have been creating web form libraries from
[1999](http://old.zope.org/Members/faassen/ZFormulator/folder_contents)
to the present [day](https://github.com/isprojects/mstform). I have a
lot of ideas about them!

To learn more about what interests me and how I think, you can also
consult [my blog
highlights](@/posts/secret-weblog-highlights.md).

A recent post that I'm a bit proud of is [framework
patterns](@/posts/framework-patterns.md).

# Technical Skills

I have more than 20 years experience with web development and Python,
and almost as much with Javascript. I've been working with React for
about 5 years now. I've used both Redux as well as Mobx. In the last few
years I've picked up TypeScript and more recently I've been learning
Rust in my spare time.

I am an expert in doing test-driven development. I also am experienced
in mentoring developers in these techniques.

I love Python and I have very deep experience with it, but I don't want
to be pigeonholed as a Python-only developer -- I have a lot of
experience with JavaScript as well, and believe a lot of my experience
is transferable and I'm willing to try new things.

# Project Circumstances

![Sweet pea flowers growing in my garden](/img/sweet_peas.jpg)

I'm a freelancer and have been self-employed for almost my entire
career. I prefer to work with an hourly rate. I prefer longer duration
projects where I can focus on the work, though I realize I have to prove
my worth to you first.

I like to work remotely. I have have years of experience doing that. For
larger projects I've worked with remote sub-contractors of my own as
well.

I also like to go to you on premise. When I do that, I work with a team
to build cool new stuff. This involves mentoring and guiding developers,
as well learning from them. There are many ways in which we can work
together: pair programming, mob programming, code reviews, presentations
and coding dojos. I've had positive experiences working as part of a
Scrum team the last few years.

I'm based in the Netherlands (Tilburg) and I'm not willing to relocate.
Ideally I divide my time between visits and remote work. How we arrange
that depends on where you are and what you prefer; if you're nearby a
visit is easy, but business trips are certainly possible as well if
you're further away.

I take care of my work/life balance because that is better for me, but
also because I can do better work for you that way -- a well rested,
relaxed mind is a lot better at creative work.

# In Conclusion

If you want to hire a very experienced developer who keeps up to date,
likes to spread knowledge, and can think out of the box, I'm here!
