+++
title = "Looking for new challenges"
date = 2016-11-23
slug = "looking-for-new-challenges"

[taxonomies]
tags = ["planetpython", "python", "react", "javascript"]
+++

Fair warning: In this blog post I aim to sell myself. I'm looking for an
exciting and challenging new freelance engagement.

I'm a software developer and I have been one professionally for about 20
years now. I have deep experience, and I continue to learn and create. I
know what real-world codebases look like, and I know software
development is also about people. **I think I can offer lot of value. I
can develop software for you, and I can also help you improve the way
you develop software.**

I see myself as a _creative_ developer -- I want to invent things to
improve life for myself and others. Creativity is what attracts me to
software development the most. **Creativity is transformative. If you
need a bit of transformation in your software, talk to me.**

I'm a web application developer. I've focused on web development since
the late 90s. In that period I've seen the web grow from static websites
and with a few server-side Perl scripts thrown in to the dynamic
application platform it is today. I started developing web applications
with the server-side, the only game in town then, but over the last 10
years I've shifted more and more to the client-side and JavaScript,
where much of the creativity is today. I am however still very much at
home on the server as well. I've done
[React](/posts/a-brief-history-of-reselect.html),
I've done REST, I've done hypermedia APIs, I've
[dug](/posts/graphql-and-rest.html) into
[GraphQL](/posts/the-emerging-graphql-python-stack.html).
**If you need a web developer with deep insight in the whole stack, look
no further.**

I've focused on Python for the better part of my software development
career. I came to Python early; I have seen Python grow from a small
language with no name recognition to the enormously popular language it
is today. I greatly enjoy using it. I've also criticized it [where I
felt it was
needed](/posts/python-2-gravity.html), painful
as it was. **If you need a very experienced Python developer, contact
me.**

But in the last decade I've started to use JavaScript more and more.
Thanks to the React community I've learned a few new things about
functional programming; it's exciting to see it become relevant to the
web. I haven't stopped looking at interesting new languages. **I'm a
developer who can look beyond a single programming language.**

I have repeatedly demonstrated I can take a large piece of software and
transform it:

- Back in the day, I rejuvenated the Zope web framework with
  [Five](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Zope#History), a technology that
  is still in use by the Plone CMS today.
- I took libxml2, a huge C library that was difficult to use for Python
  developers, and created the most powerful XML library in the Python
  world: [lxml](http://lxml.de/). I used the predecessor to
  [Cython](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cython) to do this (in 2004!).
- I created a simpler, better way to use Zope with
  [Grok](<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Grok_(web_framework)>). I've
  helped add web capabilities to existing codebases with a deep history.

**I can help you open up your codebase to new possibilities.**

I can build on other people's foundations, but I can also build new
foundations. In the last few years I've created
[Morepath](http://www.infoworld.com/article/3133854/application-development/5-wicked-fast-python-frameworks-you-have-to-try.html),
a web framework that compresses the
[power](http://morepath.readthedocs.io/en/latest/#morepath-super-powers)
I expect into a few thousand lines of Python code.

I'm not afraid to say I've also created many a thing that went nowhere.
In 2010 I created [Obviel](http://obviel.org), a client-side web
framework. I took concepts like model/view separation and templates and
a form library and brought them to JavaScript and the client. I thought
I was doing something new in 2010, something that people hadn't really
thought of yet. It turns out everybody had the same idea about the same
time. Backbone burst upon the scene and Obviel never got any traction.
Now I'm a frontend web framework hipster; I was doing them before it was
cool. **It was worth it, because I gained deep insights in what makes a
frontend framework tick.**

These days I prefer to use React for front-end application development.
React is awesome. With React Native a mere web developer such as myself
can even build a real mobile app. **Want a developer that loves React
but is also tempered by experience? Look no further.**

I'm looking for a new challenge. I want to help build, create and
transform. I work from home (in the Netherlands) so I can enjoy my
family and garden, but I can certainly come visit you on a regular
basis. I write code, I write docs, I write tests, I give talks, I give
training, and I review your code. I am open, constructively critical and
honest. I contribute a bit of insight here and there. **My services are
not cheap, but they are worth it.**

**In summary, here I am: a very experienced, creative web developer who
looks a little bit beyond what's in front of him.**

Think you have an interesting challenge for me? Please drop me a mail at
<faassen@startifact.com> and let's talk.
