+++
title = "Morepath 0.1 released!"
date = 2014-04-08
slug = "morepath-01-released"

[taxonomies]
tags = ["morepath", "python", "planetpython"]
+++

I've just released [Morepath](http://morepath.readthedocs.org/) 0.1!
This is Morepath's first ever proper release. Hurray! If you've been
waiting for a release before trying Morepath, now is the time to stop
waiting!

Morepath is your friendly neighborhood Python web framework with super
powers.

The docs for 0.1 are here: <http://morepath.readthedocs.org/en/0.1/>

It includes a
[quickstart](http://morepath.readthedocs.org/en/0.1/quickstart.html),
and [installation
docs](http://morepath.readthedocs.org/en/0.1/installation.html), and
much much more.

The docs are quite complete in describing Morepath's abilities and how
to use them, though undoubtedly things could be improved. Let me know if
you find any sections where things are unclear or missing!

# The Extra Bits

There are still some docs floating around that I intend to integrate
into the main documentation. One bit involves the permission and
authentication docs; I previously blogged a
[description](/posts/morepath-security).

You can integrate Morepath with SQLAlchemy or the ZODB using
[more.transaction](http://pypi.python.org/pypi/more.transaction). I've
just made a 0.1 release of that too. See [this blog
entry](/posts/racing-the-morepath-sqlalchemy-integration)
for more information on what's going on with that, and here is [example
code](https://github.com/morepath/morepath_sqlalchemy).

# Talking about Morepath

There is a \#morepath channel on freenode IRC.

If you have an issue or feature request, you can use the issue tracker
on Github:

<https://github.com/morepath/morepath/issues?milestone=1&state=open>

You can also contact me directly; contact information is at the bottom
of this weblog. I'm happy to hear from you!

# Onward to 0.2!

Morepath is now transitioning into a phase where its actual use will
drive its further development. I expect others (you?) will come up with
new and interesting ways to use the facilities and abstractions that
Morepath offers. I'm looking forward to discovering new and better ways
to do web development with you!
