+++
title = "Looking for new challenges!"
date = 2025-03-24
slug = "new-challenges-2025"

[taxonomies]
tags = []
+++


Once every while I use this blog to look for new challenges! Let me give a
brief description of who I am, what I can do, and what I enjoy doing.

I'm Martijn Faassen, a freelance software engineer based in the Netherlands.
I've been working in this capacity for almost 20 years now. I can safely say I
have deep experience developing software, from web development to systems
programming. I enjoy challenges. **I'm not afraid of my own ignorance - I enjoy
learning something new; whether that may be your business requirements or
computer science papers.**

## Technical

I've created a lot of things: open source libraries, programming languages,
workflow engines, web frameworks, and more.

I am good at software architecture and API design and how to make these factors
set up a project for success.

I have extensive experience with a range of programming languages: Rust,
TypeScript and Python in particular. I'm looking for something where I can use
Rust.

## Social

I have experience working with larger and smaller customers, both business
customers as well as organizations such as academia. I've had customers in a
range of European countries. I thrive best in contexts where the lines are
short.

I enjoy acting independently - this is part of why I am a freelancer. If I have
clarity of purpose, I do not need a lot of direction to make progress. On the
other hand I really enjoy mentoring and teaching, and have experience working
in a team context and providing leadership. But my main focus is software
development - I want to keep doing that.

I've worked with people from across the world, and have close family
connections abroad. I think this has made me more sensitive to differences in
cultures. At the same time I'm both an engineer and Dutch - I will come across
as direct!

## What I am looking for

I really enjoy mentoring and teaching, and have extensive experience working in
a team context and providing leadership. **But I love programming and want to
keep doing that.**

I've been really enjoying working full-time in the Rust programming language
for the last couple years, and I'd love to do more with that.

## Wider interests

I'm a multi-faceted person. I enjoy science & history, gardening, [artificial
life](https://blog.startifact.com/posts/apilar-an-alife-system/) and I write
[poetry](https://hyperstate.org/).

## Interested?

Let's have a chat! Mail me at faassen@startifact.com



