+++
title = "The Centre Cannot Hold"
date = 2014-02-26
slug = "the-centre-cannot-hold"

[taxonomies]
tags = ["zope", "python", "planetpython", "grok"]
+++

_Things fall apart; the centre cannot hold_

([The Second
Coming](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Second_Coming_%28poem%29) by
Yeats)

[Last time](/posts/back-to-the-center.html) I
talked about how I went back to the center of the Zope project. Over the
course of the year following, we managed to refactor the Zope Toolkit,
clean up the dependency structure, and we could drop many of its
unwanted dependencies.

I had hoped that with new leadership, a steering group, we could also
reinvigorate the Zope project itself. Could we get together and do
exciting new things again?

The answer was no.

# Chris McDonough

In late march 2009, I visited PyCon, in Chicago. There I had a
conversation with Chris McDonough, who was working on what was to become
the Pyramid web framework. He and I had a conversation about the
dependency cleanup project I had started and that had been making waves
on the zope-dev mailing list. Some beer was involved, and some
miscommunication. Chris was skeptical that the cleanup project would
succeed within the year, which confused me a bit, as we had already made
a lot of progress.

But I was talking about cleaning up circular dependencies and the
ability to lose a lot of the code. Chris was talking about making
libraries with a clear purpose and documentation.

And while we got better dependencies at the end of the year, _I_ failed.

# Burning out on Zope

The details of the straw that broke the camel's back (though I hardly
have the stamina of a camel) are immaterial. Suffice it to say that when
practical disagreements happened our steering group did not function.

So in early 2010 I realized I was putting more into the project than I
was getting out of it. I was running out of steam. It was costing me
emotionally. So I stopped going to the Zope mailing lists. While we had
made progress on matters where there was consensus, maintenance seemed
the only consensus that could still be found.

Consensus on the boring stuff is not enough when the web is changing.
And the web was changing, as it always is. A lot of the innovation on
the web was happening on the client-side, in JavaScript, but Zope had no
client-side story. People had moved into different directions, and the
community had fractured.

The dependency cleanup was just about the _only_ progress being made --
what about my personal goals? Where was the creativity, the getting
together to do new interesting things? It wasn't there. Instead we had a
bunch of opinionated people who couldn't agree enough to get anything
but basic maintenance work done, and stumbled doing even that.

I'd been involved in Zope heavily, also serving on the Zope Foundation
board for some years, including as its chairman. I decided I had to pull
back from all of it.

# The Zope Summit

In September 2010 I found myself at a Zope Developer Summit, which had
been organized in part because of my urging. I had been heavily invested
in Zope, and had been for more than 10 years. I had used Zope, benefited
from Zope, contributed to Zope, redefined Zope and built on Zope. I had
learned from Zope. I had been first board member and then chairman of
the Zope Foundation.

I had hoped that a summit could get things moving again. Talk about cool
new things that we might do together.

Zope was in trouble. The codebase would live on. It still does. But it
is in maintenance mode - it doesn't do much that is _new_.

I came to the Zope Summit with a gloomy heart. That did not help my mood
at the summit -- sorry.

I think most of us left the summit with the feeling not enough had been
accomplished. The future of Zope was disappearing. Zope had lost its
power to adapt. The web changes, but Zope didn't anymore.

This was the end of Zope, for me. I still use it in the shape of Grok to
this day, but it is not the same.

# Life After Zope

But this is not the end. The code still continues, and is being used,
though is mostly in maintenance mode.

And there is life after Zope. Next I will talk a bit about what came
after.

This blog entry is a part of a [series on
Zope](/posts/my-exit-from-zope) and my
involvement with it.
[Previous](/posts/back-to-the-center).
