+++
title = "The Perils of Volunteering"
date = 2009-03-18
slug = "the-perils-of-volunteering"

[taxonomies]
tags = ["zope foundation"]
+++

I'm on the board of the Zope Foundation. In fact, until thursday this
week, when hopefully the new board gets seated, I'm its chairman.

The old bylaws of the Zope Foundation sucked. We were burdened with them
from the start; we inherited them as the board from the startup phase.
We tried to work with them but they didn't work, and then we decided to
go with new bylaws.

So we painstakingly work on them. We finally had a big meeting in
december trying to get all our members there so we can vote for the new
bylaws and have it pass. It did pass, and we were happy.

So the Zope Foundation has new bylaws. But we have membership under the
old bylaws. Our membership roster is old and stuffy, and it won't work
as our bylaws changed and membership categories are different. The
bylaws old or new don't provide for a membership transition. We're in a
limbo. How do we get from old to new?

A few hard-working volunteers, Zope Foundation board members, try to
figure this out. We've been working on this frustrating bylaws stuff for
about the entire existence of the Foundation by now.

Now we all want to get this over with and make way for a new board. We
had already discovered that to do such a transition we need to make
reasonably bold steps (like replacing the bylaws!), otherwise nothing
much will happen.

We decide to mail everybody that is an existing member and ask them what
membership status they have, and if they don't answer, we'll assume they
don't want to be a member.

Something's weird. We noticed that some supposed members didn't receive
the email. It turns out we missed out on members who were member only
through their employer's membership under the previous structure. So we
contact those.

That, we thought, was it, doublechecking we did everything all right.
But we hadn't. Mea Culpa as the chairman of the board. I should've made
sure we had made a second try to contact people. I think I got
distracted by the other issue, and thought it was done.

We announce the foundation elections to our membership as it is then,
after the cleanup. We neglect to announce it in public. Of course we
don't have this obligation, but we should have anyway to just keep
interested bystanders informed.

People point out they don't hear much from the Zope Foundation.
Alexander Limi did today just before we had a board meeting. We do have
a [website](http://foundation.zope.org) and such that people can read,
but it's not working in getting to people. I, slightly overburdened
volunteer, grumble, but point taken.

The new board should definitely improve this, so I put it on the list of
todo items for the new board. Even the old board will. So when we
announce the election result, we make sure we _did_ announce that to
zope-announce, today.

Lennart Regebro doesn't always read the email the Foundation sends to
him directly about his membership status, but he does read
zope-announce.

So Lennart gets upset as he hadn't been aware of any election! He
contacts us. Me in particular. He tells me he wants us to redo the
election. Oh joy... Deep sigh.

So today I have a headache from all this. I was spending quite a few
hours trying to help the Zope community organize itself, not getting
paid for it, and I got an angry Lennart as a result.

I want to think about something else. I try to relax. Then accidentally
read the blogs as feeds are so very nicely integrated in my web browser
these days. So what do I see? Lennart analyzing all our mistakes, my
mistakes, in public in great detail in a [blog
entry](http://regebro.wordpress.com/2009/03/17/how-i-was-kicked-out-of-the-zope-foundation-in-eight-small-mistakes/).

It's an excellent way to discourage volunteers who have been genuinely
trying to do their best. I know, it wasn't Lennart's intent to
discourage us. Not sure what the intent of that blog posting was. Maybe
it was to get us to say sorry. Sorry, Lennart.

I feel discouraged. I want to chuck the whole Foundation, and what the
heck, chuck the whole Zope thing to boot. That's just me throwing a
hissy fit, though, and I should be better after some sleep. I will
probably be able to joke and laugh about this soon. But that's not how I
feel right now.
