+++
title = "XML, context and nuance"
date = 2005-08-31
slug = "xml-context-and-nuance"

[taxonomies]
tags = ["xml"]
+++

# XML, context and nuance

Originally this was buried in a comment to an
[article](http://copia.ogbuji.net/blog/2005-08-30/Python___X) on Uche's
weblog, but he suggested I post it on my own weblog, here goes. The
history of this long running discussion is
[here](http://faassen.n--tree.net/blog/view/weblog/2005/01/30/0).

I think for PJE [to speak about people detecting (or not) 'context and
nuance'](http://dirtsimple.org/2005/08/at-last-xml-enthusiast-who-actually.html)
in what amounts to a rant is a bit confusing. I appreciated the rant
quite a bit, but the exact thing that was missing from it was context
and nuance; it wouldn't be a good rant otherwise. As he says in a
comment to my article, his position is more nuanced than his tone was.

The one bit of context I got before he actually announced it was that he
was probably looking at the Chandler source code...

I'd seen the XML bit of his "Python is not Java" post quoted by a few
other other Python programmers, and I was responding to people who
picked up on that bit. The problem I have is more with the tone than the
content. XML is certainly far from a panacea, but it cannot be ignored
either. My problem with the rant, and the way the rant was being picked
up, is that his tone is giving an excuse to other Python programmers to
ignore XML with disdain. I don't believe that's an attitude that is
useful.

Finally, to Uche: I hope the backlash to XML can be kept from being too
viscious. Viscious backlash to me has a connotation with uninformed
lashing out, while what is needed is constructive, though strong,
criticism.
