+++
title = "Zope's entry into the commit count pissing match"
date = 2008-06-25
slug = "zope-s-entry-into-the-commit-count-pissing-match"

[taxonomies]
tags = ["zope"]
+++

Mark Ramm-Christensen of the TurboGears project starts what looks like
it will be a great [commit count pissing
match](http://compoundthinking.com/blog/index.php/2008/06/24/but-im-not-dead-yet/#comments)
. I know that wasn't his intent. He just wanted to show the TurboGears
project is active. But nevertheless, this kind of thing tends to get
rather silly rather quickly, so we certainly can't leave Zope out!

Amounts of commits on a project are only a very vague measurement of
project activity. Some projects may have more frequent, smaller commits
than others, depending on project culture. Or maybe people with more
commits simply make more mistakes! It's also only a single measurement
of project activity. Lines of code changed might make more sense, but
it's harder to do. Determining what belongs to the project and what does
not is very tricky though. There are also other measurements of
community activity. Amount of documentation produced, say. Or package
release frequency on PyPI.

Anyway, back to Zope. How does it fare in this? We're not dead yet
either, after all. In the month of june alone, the svn.zope.org
repository saw 663 commits. In the last 30 days or so, Mark's
measurement, we got 796 commits (give or take 10; I'm not being strict
with day boundaries here). Almost 800!

If we start pulling in commits from other projects related to Zope but
not kept in svn.zope.org, we'd get a bigger number. We could go counting
commits in the Plone collective, for instance. If we included commits of
projects that we sometimes use with Zope, such as SQLAlchemy and Paste,
we'd get even more commits. That'd be silly though, as we've already
won!

Hah! :)
